# FirmGuide

FirmGuide is a set of tools that help you to quickly develop an embedded
QEMU emulator or virtual machine for a Linux-based embedded system,
especially boosting the capability of dynamic analysis of the
corresponding Linux kernel.

In the emulator, you can debug, trace, and test the Linux kernel to
collect runtime information that can be used to understand
vulnerabilities, PoCs, root causes of crashes in the Linux kernel.
FirmGuide is an effectively complementary to Firmadyne that focuses on
user space programs - FirmGuide focuses on the Linux kernel.

The emulator can be automatically generated according to the list of
hardware described in the device tree blob packed together with the
Linux kernel image.  FirmGuide searches the implementation of each
hardware in a database, composites all the implementation together to be
compiled with QEMU source tree.  FirmGuide cannot handle the images
without device tree blobs.

In theory, each part of the emulator, that is, the implementation of
each hardware, is supposed to be provided manually and precisely.
However, FirmGuide tells us only the interrupt controller, the timer and
the serial are necessary to boot a Linux kernel and to spawn a shell
finally.  Focus on the three hardware and FirmGuide will handle any
other hardware for you.

We have three policies to deal with each of the three necessary
hardware.
1. If QEMU has supported that hardware, use it.
2. If not, you can follow our paper to automatically generate what
   FirmGuide needs.
3. Otherwise, you can read its datasheet and send a patch to QEMU, then
   going back to policy 1.

## Install

``` bash
git clone xxx --depth=1; cd firmguide; sudo make; sudo make qemu sparse
```

If you just use [Tools](#tools) of FirmGuide, please just `make`. There
is no need to install `qemu` and `sparse`.

## Usage

> FirmGuide is a command-oriented tool like `git`.
Please look at [Subcommand](doc/Subcommands.md) for more information.

The basic of FirmGuide is to convert a device tree file to a QEMU
virtual machine.

``` bash
./firmguide synthesize -dtb /path/to/dtb
```

For mips, you should provide `-e` and `-ld` (`./firmguide loaddr`).

``` bash
./firmguide -e l -ld 0x80000000 synthesize -dtb /path/to/dtb
```

Upon `synthesize`, you can upload a firmware image then. 

``` bash
./firmguide upload -f /path/to/a/firmware/image
```

For mips, you should provide `-e` and `-ld` (`./firmguide loaddr`) as well.

``` bash
./firmguide -e l -ld 0x80000000 upload -f /path/to/a/firmware/image
```

## Tools

Given the source of QEMU machine generated by `synthesize`, you can
install it to QEMU source tree. It's useful when you'd like to update
some part of the QEMU machine.

``` bash
./firmguide install -s /path/to/fg_source
```

Given a firmware image, you can unpack it to list pathnames of the Linux
kernel and the device tree blob, and usually of the uImage.

``` bash
./firmguide unpack -f /path/to/a/firmware/image
```

Given the source of Linux kernel with a makeout.txt (`make -Bnk`) in the
same directory, you can generate the preprocessed file (.i) of an file
that contains a specific function. Please assign the cross compiler at
the same time. It's useful when you are debugging with the source of
Linux kernel.

``` bash
./firmguide analysrc -s /path/to/source -cc /path/to/cross_compile_prefix -e start_kernel
```

## Virtual hardware development

To develop a virtual hardware, you are supposed to be familiar with the
code structure of QEMU virtual hardware. Having learned that, you can
read the datasheet of that hardware if any to start your coding. You can
also follow our paper to manually or automatically analyze Linux kernel
source code to implement an interrupt controller, a timer, which is
enough for the Linux kernel to finish its startup process.

If to follow our paper, please read [FirmGuide rendering
system](doc/Rendering.md), [Manual FirmGuide
offline](doc/Manual-FirmGuide-offline.md), and [Automatic FirmGuide
offline](doc/Automatic-FirmGuide-offline.md), respectively, and have a
try!

## Advanced topics

[FirmGuide internals and development](doc/Development.md)

## License

[MIT License](./LICENSE)
